WIP OddContrast Guide [contrast] (#898)
oddbird/oddleventy: content/blog/2025/oddcontrast-guide.md

---
title: OddContrast Title
sub:: A guide to using OddContrast
author: oddbird
date: 2025-05-20
tags:
  - Article
  - Accessibility
  - Color
  - Design
  - OddTools
image:
  src: blog/2025/oddcontrast-gamut-sliders.png
  alt: >
    OddContrast displays sRGB gamut range
    in P3 color format and an estimate

>     of foreground alpha value ratio.

Author: I need to update this image (was used for the previous OddContrast post)

summary: |
  Learn how to use OddBird's color tool that not only checks contrast ratios
  but also utilizes the color formats and spaces newly available in CSS.
---

> ## Background we might not need?

Author: I had that larger chunk of text at the bottom here, but I think this is probably a short enough intro without getting too technical into the details of each color space. Needs a better heading here :)

- [A perceptual color space for image processing](https://bottosson.github.io/posts/oklab/) by Björn Ottosson
- [OKLCH in CSS: why we moved from RGB and HSL](https://evilmartians.com/chronicles/oklch-in-css-why-quit-rgb-hsl) by Evil Martians

## ToDo / Things to include

- [ ] Evaluates the contrast ratio between two colors
- [ ] WCAG 2 Level AA and AAA pass/fail results for both normal and large text
- [x] Resources section that has links to learn more about color
- [x] Shows the selected colors in all the supported color notation
- [x] Indicates when a chosen color falls outside the current color gamut

## Background that I probably don't need, was going to start with this

When HSL was introduced in the
[CSS Color Module 3](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-3/#hsl-color)
it offered an intuitive approach to color manipulation.
Designers and developers could more easily predict the resulting
color when adjusting the Hue (H), Saturation (S), and Lightness (L) values.
Now with the [Color 4 specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/),
color formats like Oklch offer similar predictability but with an even broader

> palette of possibilities as it isn't confined to the sRGB color space.

Author: This is that chunk of color info that I started to write about but thought this would be better as a completely separate post but also would make any post extremely long.

    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-swap.gif',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }]
) }}

Once you are happy with your colors, you can easily copy your preferred color
notation to the clipboard with a single click.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-clipboard.png',
    alt: 'the copy to clipboard flow'
  }]
) }}

## Visualize the in-gamut range

OddContrast allows you to choose whether or not to display a color gamut for
visual reference, and if so, which specific gamut you'd like to see. Once a
gamut is selected, the color sliders will display the "in-gamut" boundaries and
will update with the color values. To preview this, select the sRGB option in
the "Show Gamut" field, edit the color sliders and see how every shift in color
will affect the other channels.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-srgb-gamut.jpg',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }]
) }}

<div class="contain">
{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-gamut-warning.jpg',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }],
    class='align-left'
) }}

> A warning will be displayed if your color is out of gamut over the swatch if you have a gamut selected. A separate warning will appear near the color notations for each affected color space regardless of your gamut display setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your color is outside the selected gamut, 
a warning will be displayed over the swatch. 
A separate warning will appear near the color notations 
for each affected color space 
regardless of your gamut display setting.
```

value as a `%`. You can even used named colors! Here’s `honeydew` as the
foreground color.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-named-colors-cropped.jpg',
    alt: 'honeydew named colors is used as the foreground color'
  }]
) }}

## Workflow enhancements

To streamline your color-editing tasks, OddContrast includes several helpful
features. For starters, you can edit a single component of a color by using the
visual sliders. These change depending on the color format you've selected. For
instance, if Oklab is selected, the first slider controls the lightness (L).
The next two sliders show options from green to red (A) and blue to yellow (B).
The last slider sets the Alpha value and is consistent across all color formats.
Additionally, you can use your keyboard arrow keys to nudge the color values
incrementally when focused.

Need to swap the foreground and background colors? No problem, select the left
right arrow icon button or you can drag and drop the color swatches themselves.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-swap.gif',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }]

> ) }}

Author: @jgerigmeyer @mirisuzanne Is there any way we can get this to stay a gif file and have it keep it's animation? 

I played around locally a bit. Here were the steps I took:

1.  I added `gif` to the taxonomy.yaml file in the img / formats list. When I added a new image I see all three formats are now in the markup, but it wasn't animated. 
2. Then I found this: https://www.11ty.dev/docs/plugins/image/#animated-images  
I added the snippet:

```
 sharpOptions: {
    animated: true,
  },
```

To the src/filters/images.js file on line 32, saved, added a new image. I saw that only the webp and gif loaded this time which is what I would have expected, but the animation isn't there. Even when I open the generated images separately it didn't animate but if I drag my original image to a browser it is animated. 

---

Looking at the site, I think there may only be 1 other page that has a gif , it is on the bottom of this page: https://www.oddbird.net/2018/05/14/vueconfus/

Author: If it is an easy fix, great! If not, I can edit two images together like I did for hte copy to clipboard example. I had planned on three gifs for this post but it will be fine if we have still images.

Reviewer: I don't know off-hand. We're currently passing every image manually through the same function, and might want to consider either:

- using their built-in html transformation, which _might_ be smarter about this?
- a separate function for just animated stuff, if it needs different settings to work

But I don't know how difficult either approach would be. Probably not something I can take on before my trip.

Reviewer 2: @stacyk Would you like me to take a look at this? I'm guessing we can make some adjustments to allow animated gifs.

Author: @jgerigmeyer It seems like we use them so infrequently that it may not be necessary. It was for this post and then the one in 2018 so maybe it isn't worth the time spent.

---
title: Make the Web a More a Colorful Place!
sub: A guide to using new color spaces & formats with OddContrast

> author: oddbird

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
author: stacy
```

Author: I used ODdBird like James' OddContrast post had OddBird: https://www.oddbird.net/2025/04/11/new-features-oddcontrast/

date: 2025-06-05
tags:
  - Article
  - Accessibility
  - Color
  - Design
  - OddContrast
  - OddTools
image:
  src: blog/2025/oddcontrast-guide.jpg
  alt: >
    OddContrast displays P3 gamut range
    in Oklch color format
summary: |
  OddBird's color tool not only checks contrast ratios,
  but supports the new CSS color formats and spaces.
---

{% import 'embed.macros.njk' as embed %}

For years designers and developers were limited to colors in the sRGB colors

> space, using formats like Hexadecimal, RGB, and HSL. As display technology

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
space, using formats like hexadecimal, RGB, and HSL. As display technology
```

Author: dang it, that was one of the last minute changes I made. I couldn't decide and I went the wrong way :)

Reviewer 2: It's not a big deal -- I think I prefer `Hex` and `hexidecimal` 😄

progressed, so too has CSS, and we have access to additional color spaces and
wider gamuts. These advances led us to build OddContrast, a color editing and
testing tool that handles our new world of modern color formats.

## The flexibility of OddContrast

Although it looks simple on the surface, OddContrast has many built-in
conveniences when working with color.

> The default color format is display-p3 but you can select from the following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default color format is `display-p3`, but you can select from the following
```

Author: updated in 613995ff159685af68a52ea345394d3d1f006710

For instance, you can use decimals in `oklch(.44 0.1 295)`
even though the default is set to display the lightness value as a `%`.
You can even used named colors! Here’s `honeydew` as the foreground color.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-named-colors-cropped.jpg',
    alt: 'honeydew named colors is used as the foreground color'
  }]
) }}

While not valid CSS notation, OddContrast also accepts 6 and 8-digit Hex
colors without the `#`.
This flexibility is helpful when coming from design tools as they
often will not include the full color notation.

## Workflow enhancements

To streamline your color-editing tasks, OddContrast includes several helpful
features. For starters, you can edit a single component of a color by using the
visual sliders. These change depending on the color format you've selected. For
instance, if Oklab is selected, the first slider controls the lightness (L).
The next two sliders show options from green to red (A) and blue to yellow (B).
The last slider sets the Alpha value and is consistent across all color formats.
Additionally, you can use your keyboard arrow keys to nudge the color values
incrementally when focused.

> Need to swap the foreground and background colors? No problem, select the left
> right arrow icon button or you can drag and drop the color swatches themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Need to swap the foreground and background colors? No problem -- select the
left-right arrow icon button, or drag-and-drop the color swatches themselves.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm fine either way, just thought it was easier to read/parse as `left-right` 🤷

Author: updated in 613995ff159685af68a52ea345394d3d1f006710

    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-swaps.png',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }],
  class='extend-large'
) }}

Once you are happy with your colors, you can easily copy your preferred color
notation to the clipboard with a single click.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-clipboard.png',
    alt: 'the copy to clipboard flow'
  }]
) }}

## Visualize the in-gamut range

OddContrast allows you to choose whether or not to display a color gamut for
visual reference, and if so, which specific gamut you'd like to see. Once a
gamut is selected, the color sliders will display the "in-gamut" boundaries and
will update with the color values. To preview this, select the sRGB option in
the "Show Gamut" field, edit the color sliders and see how every shift in color
will affect the other channels.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-srgb-gamut.jpg',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }]
) }}

<div class="contain">
{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-gamut-warning.jpg',
    alt: 'use the arrow icon to swap foreground and background colors'
  }],

>     class='align-left'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  class='align-left'
```

Author: Fixed in 613995ff159685af68a52ea345394d3d1f006710

---
title: Make the Web a More a Colorful Place!
sub: A guide to using new color spaces & formats with OddContrast
author: oddbird

> date: 2025-06-05

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-06-06
```

Using the [WCAG 2 contrast ratio requirements](https://webaim.org/articles/contrast/#ratio),
OddContrast displays a pass or fail message for meeting the minimum (Level AA)
and enhanced (Level AAA) values for normal and large text.
A warning is shown if the the colors include an alpha value lower than one
as WCAG 2 does not account for transparency.

OddContrast approximates a ratio by premultiplying a semi-transparent
foreground color in the sRGB space. In practice,
the displayed foreground color may vary depending on the display and browser.

Without knowing what is behind a background color with transparency,
OddContrast cannot estimate the contrast ratio.
If the background color is not opaque,
the contrast ratio is computed without background or foreground opacity.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-alpha.jpg',
    alt: 'a warning is shown when using the alpha channel'
  }]
) }}

## For fun

To add some whimsy, OddContrast proudly showcases your chosen color
combination within its very own logo.

{{ embed.figure(
  data=[{
    img: 'blog/2025/oddcontrast-inline-logos.png',
    alt: 'OddContrast logo with different colors'
  }]
) }}

> 

Author: I need to give these a background as they blend in with the dark mode background.

Author: ![Screenshot 2025-06-05 at 12 09 09 PM](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dfb572e2-2564-438e-bd0b-0ea792bd136d)
 
updated

---
title: A guide to using OddContrast
sub: A modern color tool
author: oddbird
date: 2025-05-21
tags:
  - Article
  - Accessibility
  - Color
  - Design
  - OddTools
image:

>   src: blog/2025/oddcontrast-gamut-sliders.png

Author: This and the date are the last two known things I need to update
